Oprah Winfrey has said Prince Harry clarified it was neither the Queen nor the Duke of Edinburgh who questioned what his son's skin colour would be.

Winfrey told CBS News on Monday the prince "did not tell me who was part of those conversations".

The revelation that a family member wondered "how dark" Archie's complexion might be came during a TV interview that aired overnight in the US.

The Duchess of Sussex had described the remarks as a low point.

"He did not share the identity with me but he wanted to make sure I knew, and if I had an opportunity to share it, that it was not his grandmother or grandfather that were part of those conversations," Winfrey said.

When asked for further details on Monday, Winfrey said she "tried to get that answer on camera and off" but the prince did not elaborate.

She told CBS This Morning that she was shocked to hear about the skin colour remarks during the interview. "Even on the take, you can hear me go, 'whoa I cannot believe you are saying this now'."

When asked why she thinks the couple agreed to speak with her, Winfrey said she felt they "were ready to do it" after having been "lied about for a series of years".

"I said to my team, the most important question to be answered here at the end of this show will be, 'why did they leave'?" Winfrey said.

"And I think the stories of blindsiding the Queen were very damaging to them and also hurtful because they understood clearly that there had been months and months of preparation."

CBS has also shared new clips from the couple's three hour interview with the chat show host.
In one, when asked by Winfrey if the couple left the UK because of racism, Prince Harry said that "was a large part of it".

Harry: Tabloid racism 'large part' of why we left
Meghan 'didn't want to be alive any more'
'Royalty is not a shield from the despair of racism'
In another clip discussing how the UK press treated other members of the royal family, Meghan told Winfrey that "rude and racist are not the same".

"You've also had a press team that goes on the record to defend you especially when they know something's not true, and that didn't happen for us," the duchess said.

Winfrey also asked Prince Harry if any family members had apologised to him for the reasons he felt he had to leave.

Prince Harry replied, "sadly not".

"The feeling is that this was our decision therefore the consequences are on us."
Meghan and Harry interview: Urgent Palace talks over claims
Crisis meetings involving senior royals have taken place following the Duke and Duchess of Sussex's interview with Oprah Winfrey.

BBC royal correspondent Daniela Relph said it was "increasingly unsustainable for Buckingham Palace to say nothing" about Prince Harry and Meghan's claims.

She said the Palace "will not want to feel rushed into saying something".

Prince Harry and Meghan spoke about racism, mental health, the media and other royals in the interview.

Meghan - the first mixed-race member of the modern Royal Family - said a low point came when Harry was asked by an unnamed royal family member "how dark" their son Archie's skin might be.

Prince Harry later clarified to Oprah that the comments were not made by either the Queen or the Duke of Edinburgh.


Meanwhile, US President Joe Biden's spokeswoman said he would praise anyone for having the courage to speak out about mental health.

White House press secretary Jen Psaki described Prince Harry, 36, and Meghan, 39, as "private citizens" who were "sharing their own story in their own struggles".

The two-hour interview was broadcast on Sunday by CBS in the US and was screened in the UK on ITV on Monday night.

Harry and Meghan rattle monarchy's gilded cage
12 things we learned from Meghan's Oprah interview
Meghan and Diana: Press coverage of two princesses
In the interview, the duchess said that she found royal life so difficult that at times she "didn't want to be alive any more", and when she approached the institution for help, she did not get it.

Labour's shadow education secretary Kate Green said Meghan's claims were "really distressing, shocking".

She told Sky News: "If there are allegations of racism, I would expect them to be treated by the Palace with the utmost seriousness and fully investigated."

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said that Meghan's allegations about racism and a lack of mental health support should be taken "very seriously".

Prime Minister Boris Johnson declined to comment on Monday, but said he has "always had the highest admiration for the Queen and the unifying role she plays".

He said "when it comes to matters to do with the Royal Family, the right thing for prime ministers to say is nothing", after being asked specifically if he believed the Royal Family was racist.
During the interview, the duchess was asked why she thought the Royal Family did not make Archie a prince - which Meghan said she wanted so that he would get police protection.

"In those months when I was pregnant, all around this same time so we have in tandem the conversation of he won't be given security, he's not going to be given a title, and also concerns and conversations about how dark his skin might be when he was born," Meghan said.

She said the remarks about skin colour were made to Harry and he relayed them to her.

The couple's children do not automatically become princes or princesses due to a rule that has been in place since 1917 - unless the Queen steps in.

'Damaging'
Asked by Oprah whether there were concerns that her child would be "too brown" and that would be a problem, Meghan said: "If that is the assumption you are making, that is a pretty safe one."

When pressed, she refused to reveal who the individual was, saying: "I think that would be very damaging to them."

Prince Harry also refused to give further details, saying: "That conversation, I am never going to share."

"At the time it was awkward, I was a bit shocked," he added.

Oprah later revealed that the prince had shared with her that the remarks had not come from his grandparents - the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh.

The US mogul who gave Meghan and Harry a home
'Royalty is not a shield from the despair of racism'
Prince Harry said that none of his relatives spoke out in support of Meghan about the "colonial undertones" of news headlines and articles.

"No-one from my family ever said anything over those three years. That hurts," he said.

The couple moved to California after formally stepping down from royal duties in March 2020, and it was announced last month that they would not be returning as working members of the Royal Family.

In new footage not included in the original interview, Prince Harry was asked if the couple left the UK because of racism, and replied: "It was a large part of it."

In other key revelations:

The couple announced their second child, which is due in the summer, is a girl
They exchanged vows in a ceremony led by the Archbishop of Canterbury in their "backyard" three days before they were legally married at their public wedding in May 2018
Prince Harry said his brother and father were "trapped within the system" of the Royal Family
He said his family cut him off financially at the beginning of last year and his father stopped taking his calls
But the prince said he loved his brother "to bits" and wanted to heal his relationship with both him and his father
Meghan said she phoned the Queen after Prince Philip went into hospital last month
Newspaper headlines: Palace 'reeling' over Meghan and Harry 'bombshell' interview
Anne Sacoolas: Harry Dunn suspect 'willing to do community service'
The suspect in the death of Harry Dunn would be willing to do community service and make a "contribution" in his memory, her lawyer has said.

Mr Dunn, 19, died in a crash near RAF Croughton in Northamptonshire in 2019.

Amy Jeffress, the lawyer for suspect Anne Sacoolas, who returned to the United States claiming diplomatic immunity, said such a crash would not be prosecuted criminally in the US.

Harry's mother, Charlotte Charles, said she must face "the UK justice system."

Ms Jeffress added that her client "never denied that this was her fault".

The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) has authorised Northamptonshire Police to charge Mrs Sacoolas with causing the teenager's death by dangerous driving, but an extradition request was rejected by the US government in January 2020.
Speaking to Joshua Rozenberg, for BBC Radio 4's Law in Action, Ms Jeffress said they had been trying to resolve the case in a way that would not involve Mrs Sacoolas's return to the UK.

Ms Jeffress said: "We understand that community service is a typical sentence for offences like this.

"We have offered ever since over a year ago that she would be willing to serve that kind of a sentence and to make a contribution in Harry's memory, to take other steps to try to bring some peace to the family."

Harry Dunn civil case 'opportunity to hear truths'
Civil claim against Dunn suspect to remain in US
CPS pursue Harry Dunn case despite immunity ruling
Ms Jeffress said Mrs Sacoolas had driven "instinctively" on the right-hand side of the road after leaving the US military base where her husband had a job covered by diplomatic immunity.

At the time of the crash on 27 August 2019, Mrs Sacoolas had only been in the UK "for a few weeks" and had made "a tragic mistake", she said.

"And she's never denied that this was her fault, that she caused this collision by driving on the wrong side of the road," said Ms Jeffress.

She claimed reports Mrs Sacoolas had not called for help were untrue, stating she flagged down a motorist who called the ambulance service while she notified police at the military base.
The lawyer said her client had co-operated fully with police, took a breathalyser test which produced a zero reading and surrendered her phone to show she had not been using it.

She remained at the scene until told by the police to leave and was subsequently interviewed by them for several hours, Ms Jeffress said.

The lawyer added: "One aspect of this that has not been reported is that this kind of an accident, had it occurred in the United States, would not be prosecuted criminally.

"In the United States, these cases are only prosecuted where there is evidence of recklessness that rises to the level of close to intent - drunk driving, distracted driving, a hit-and-run situation or excessive speeding.

"But there was none of that here."

She said she understood this was one of the reasons the US was not prepared to waive her client's immunity.

Mrs Charles said: "In this country we do not get to advise our Crown Prosecution Service as to what they hand down, we don't get to influence the judge and jury in anyway.

"She may want to community service and there is nothing we can do to influence that, she has to go through the UK justice system - which is one of the fairest in the world - they will decide.

"She just needs to come back and get it over and done with."
Ms Jeffress said Mrs Sacoolas "would very much like to move forward and resolve the case".

"She's willing to meet with the family to provide whatever information they are seeking; and we truly hope that we can do that and give the family some measure of peace.

"Anne is truly sorry for Harry's family and the pain that this has caused."
Mr Dunn's parents have launched a civil claim against Mrs Sacoolas and her husband Jonathan in the US state of Virginia, where they live.

The next stage would normally be for Mrs Sacoolas to give a formal deposition - answering questions put by the claimants' lawyer.

Ms Jeffress said she thought "it would much better for Anne to provide whatever information the family seeks in a less formal setting than a deposition where lawyers are involved and there are objections and so forth".

She added: "If the case does not settle, then depositions would be taken, and she would comply."

Ms Jeffress also denied suggestions that Interpol was seeking her client's arrest in the US under a so-called Red Notice.

"There is no Red Notice, and there never was a Red Notice and so Interpol will not be assisting in this matter."

The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office said: "We believe the US' refusal to extradite Anne Sacoolas amounts to a denial of justice and we continue to support the Dunn family to seek justice for Harry. The Foreign Secretary has raised the case with Secretary Blinken."
University of Kansas parts way with head coach Les Miles following reports on harassment allegations during his LSU tenure.
Les Miles and Kansas University agreed that he will no longer work as head football coach after a Title IX investigation into his time at LSU.
(CNN)The University of Kansas and head football coach Les Miles have agreed to part ways effective immediately, the school's athletics department announced Monday.

The announcement comes days after KU director of athletics Jeff Long said Miles would be placed on administrative leave while the school conducted a review to determine next steps.
It followed the release of two reports investigating accusations of sexual harassment and inappropriate behavior by Miles during his time at Louisiana State University. Miles has denied the allegations.
Miles was the head coach at LSU from 2005-16, winning the national championship in the 2007 season. He was hired by the Jayhawks to lead their football team on November 18, 2018.
"I am extremely disappointed for our university, fans and everyone involved with our football program," Long said in a statement Monday. "There is a lot of young talent on this football team, and I have no doubt we will identify the right individual to lead this program. We will begin the search for a new head coach immediately with an outside firm to assist in this process. We need to win football games, and that is exactly what we're going to do."
A statement from Miles was also provided by the athletics department.
"This is certainly a difficult day for me and for my family," Miles said. "I love this university and the young men in our football program. I have truly enjoyed being the head coach at KU and know that it is in a better place now than when I arrived. To our student-athletes, I want you to remember that you came to play for KU and earn a degree here. So, I implore you to stay and build on what we started and do all of the things we talked about doing together. There is a bright future for all of you and for KU Football."
2 reports investigated Miles at LSU
Friday's announcement of Miles' administrative leave followed the release of an LSU Title IX investigation conducted by the Husch Blackwell law firm. That report followed on the release of findings from a 2013 investigation into Miles by the Taylor Porter law firm.
The Taylor Porter investigation, which was at the request of LSU, concluded that Miles "engaged in behavior which showed poor judgment," but didn't substantiate any legal violation.
On Friday, Miles' attorney, Peter Ginsberg, said in a statement that "the Taylor Porter Report should put an end to the baseless, inaccurate media reports that Coach Les Miles engaged in an appropriate touching of an Athletic Department student volunteer eight years ago."
"Coach Miles denies then, as he denies now, that any such conduct occurred," Ginsberg said, adding, "The Report also disclosed that a second woman made a similar allegation. The Report found that accuser was totally unreliable and her claim totally unsupported."
The attorney also blasted the Husch Blackwell investigation, Ginsberg said the investigators did not interview Miles or other key witnesses. Instead, he alleged the law firm second-guessed the Taylor Porter findings without providing any basis for doing so.
Husch Blackwell was hired by LSU following a report in USA Today in November 2020 headlined "LSU mishandled sexual misconduct complaints against students, including top athletes."
The Husch Blackwell report includes a statement from Sharon Lewis, who currently is Associate Athletic Director for Football Recruiting and Alumni Relations.
Her statement from May 2019 "chronicled significant alleged misconduct committed by the then-most powerful person in the Athletics Department (and perhaps the University), LSU Football Coach Les Miles, from approximately 2009 until Miles' departure in 2016."
Among the allegations made by Lewis, the report says, was that after losing the 2012 national championship game, Miles "attempted to sexualize the staff of student workers in the football program by, for instance, allegedly demanding that he wanted 'blondes with the big boobs' and 'pretty girls.'"
Miles has denied all allegations of misconduct, the report said. CNN had asked through Kansas for comment from Miles on the report.
According to the Husch Blackwell report, Joe Alleva, then LSU's director of athletics, stated that he "recommended to the University's President, to the University's Board of Supervisors, and to the University's attorneys, to terminate Les Miles for cause."
"One more time I want us to think about which scenario is worse for LSU," Alleva said in a June 21, 2013 email to incoming LSU president F. King Alexander, which is included in the report. "Explaining why we let him go or explaining why we let him stay."
KU said Monday that the search for a new head coach begins immediately and that Mike DeBord will continue to serve as the acting head coach until an interim head coach is determined.
As China tensions linger, Biden prepares for first summit with key Asia-Pacific leaders
Four US F/A-18s and four MiG 29Ks from the Indian navy aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya are seen from the flight deck of the USS Nimitz while participating in Malabar 2020 in the Indian Ocean in November.
Tokyo (CNN)The leaders of the United States, Japan, India and Australia will meet in a virtual summit this week, a source in Japan with direct knowledge of the talks told CNN on Tuesday.

It will be the first time talks have been held between the heads of state of the four-member Quad and comes as all four countries see heightened tensions with China over a variety of issues.
"It's confirmed the Quad meeting will happen soon, likely on Friday," the source said.
The Quad, or Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, is an informal strategic forum for the four nations involved and has featured semi-regular summits and information exchanges.
But the meetings have never featured the four heads of state, currently US President Joe Biden, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison.
While not a formal military alliance like NATO, the Quad is seen by some as a potential counterweight to growing Chinese influence and alleged aggression in the Asia-Pacific region. The collation has been denounced by Beijing as an anti-China bloc.
Morrison previewed the talks in a news conference last week.
"The Quad is very central to the United States' and our thinking about the region," Morrison said.
"This will become a feature of Indo-Pacific engagement. But it's not going to be a big bureaucracy with a big secretariat and those sorts of things. It will be four leaders, four countries, working together constructively for the peace, prosperity and stability of the Indo-Pacific, which is good for everyone in the Indo-Pacific," the Australian PM said.
Joint military exercises
On the military portion of the Quad, cooperation has been increasing over the past year through bilateral agreements between Quad partners and joint military drills.
Last November, Australia joined the annual Malabar exercises with the US, Japan and India. Conducted annually since 1992, the maneuvers have grown in size and complexity in recent years to address what the US Navy has previously described as a "variety of shared threats to maritime security in the Indo-Asia Pacific."
Ships from the Indian Navy, Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) and the US Navy sail in formation during Malabar 2018.
The participation of Australia meant all four members of the Quad were involved in the drills for the first time since 2007.
All four have seen turbulent relations with China over the past few years.
Indian and Chinese troops were involved in a military clash along the Line of Actual Control -- the de facto border between the two countries in the Himalayas -- in June, which left troops dead on both sides after hand-to-hand combat.
Relations between Beijing and New Delhi have been frosty since, with both trade and technology disputes arising.
Japan and China remain at odds over the disputed Senkaku Islands. Beijing has increased the presence of its coast guard vessels near the uninhabited East China Sea islands, which are known as the Diaoyus in China.
Australia and China have seen relations plummet over a series of trade disputes.
The US, meanwhile, has increased the tempo of its naval and air missions in the South China Sea, while pushing back at Beijing's claims to the vast waterway. It has also stepped up support of self-governed Taiwan, which Beijing claims as its sovereign territory.
Asia and China have been a key foreign policy focus of the Biden administration since it took office on January 20.
Last week, a State Department official and a diplomat from Asia said US Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin will travel to Japan and South Korea from March 14 to 18.
It will be the first international trip by Biden Cabinet officials since the US President's inauguration.
Japanese leader expected to visit Washington
On Monday, Japan said Prime Minister Suga will visit the White House at the "earliest possible time," while taking the Covid-19 situation into account, according to Chief Cabinet Secretary Katsunobu Kato.
Kato said in a daily press briefing Monday the Japan-US summit meeting would happen, but the date and details have not been decided.
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga speaks during a news conference after a Parliament session in Tokyo on December 4, 2020.
If confirmed, Suga will be the first international leader to visit the White House under the Biden administration.
Blinken this month cited the US relationship with Beijing as "the biggest geopolitical test of the 21st century." He said there is a need to engage China from a position of strength which can only be done alongside allies and partners.
"China is the only country with the economic, diplomatic, military, and technological power to seriously challenge the stable and open international system -- all the rules, values, and relationships that make the world work the way we want it to," Blinken said in the speech about the Biden administration's national security strategy.
CNN's Junko Ogura contributed to this report.
London (CNN)As the world digests the bombshell details revealed in Oprah Winfrey's interview with Prince Harry and the Duchess of Sussex, it's almost inevitable that questions will be asked of the British monarchy's continued relevance in the 21st century.

There's no escaping that the claims made in the interview are extremely serious. Meghan says that in her time as a member of the family, she experienced suicidal thoughts and that a senior royal had racist conversations about the color of her baby's skin.
Harry talked of a lack of support and understanding for the toll that royal life took on the couple's mental health, and added that the attacks they had suffered in the media could have come from "within the institution."
The version of events laid bare in the interview paints a picture of an outmoded institution whose lack of flexibility left it incapable of accommodating people facing challenges that are entirely normal for public figures in the 21st century. Given the claims in 2018 that the union of these two people marked a massive step forward in modernizing the most famous family on earth, this is a tragedy, say observers.
"Harry and Meghan were superstars who could have been such a positive thing for the family in modernizing," says Kate Williams, a leading Royal historian and professor of public engagement with history at the UK's University of Reading. "The fact that it's clear from the interview they felt they had no choice but to leave because the family failed to support them over racist abuse and clear mental health concerns is very troubling."
This narrative will no doubt be a feature of much of the post-interview commentary -- and should be a real concern for Harry's relatives back in the UK. While there is huge public support for Queen Elizabeth and the monarchy she currently leads, the question of what comes after her in a modern Britain has yet to really be examined in any detail.
"Generally speaking, support for the monarchy and support for the Queen correlate," said Joe Twyman, director of public opinion consultancy Deltapoll. However, he points out that the Queen, unlike many other members of the family, is quiet and very rarely gives her opinion on anything.
It is possible that many conservative, traditionalist monarchists won't be so happy with Charles ascending to the throne. The Prince of Wales has talked at length in public about environmental issues and climate change, and it's far from certain that supporters of his tight-lipped mother will transfer their affections.
What could be even more of a concern for the family, especially in light of this interview, is what younger generations think of the monarchy.
"Among younger people, support for Meghan is roughly the same as support for the far more traditional Kate, compared to older Brits who don't like Meghan so much," Twyman explained. "While we don't know if this is an age or cohort thing and these people might become more conservative as they age, it is entirely possible that the generation who thinks the royals should maintain a stiff upper lip and not talk about issues like women's rights and mental health will die out. To people from a certain generation, the idea of bowing to your grandmother every time you see her just because she's the Queen seems insane."
hat concerns were raised, the couple said, about the color of their baby's skin before he was born could have consequences beyond a PR disaster for the royals. The British monarch is currently head of state to many countries in the Commonwealth, a diplomatic coup for the UK.
"We know that some members of the Commonwealth intend to remove the [British] monarch as head of state once Elizabeth is gone," said Williams. In many Commonwealth nations, Britain's colonial past is already a difficult pill to swallow.
Meghan addressed this directly in the interview, describing how she thought her and Harry's baby would provide an "added benefit" for people in the Commonwealth. "How inclusive is that, that you can see someone who looks like you in this family," she said.
CNN has reached out to the royal family for comment.
For others, however, the fact that Meghan's race had been such a prominent topic when she joined the royal family is a sign that claims of a modernizing monarchy were wishful thinking at best.
Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex attend the Cirque du Soleil Premiere Of "TOTEM" at Royal Albert Hall on January 16, 2019 in London, England.
"Personally, I think it's actually a good thing as it shows that all the noise around the wedding being a great moment for the royal family to become more inclusive was completely untrue," says Kehinde Andrews, professor of Black studies at City University, Birmingham. "It's exposed in an undeniable way the way in which racism exists in British society and how closed off an institution the royal family is. Silence and maintaining image is more important than actually doing anything that matters."
If the royal family wants to move on from this, then it will have to go through a period of reflection and take the claims made by their relatives seriously. If the institution wants to avoid looking irrelevant in an diverse and modern Britain, then it needs to think back to the claims made about welcoming Meghan in 2018.
"What's important now is that they don't shelve the half-in, half-out idea that Harry and Meghan proposed initially. In 2021, are we really saying that more minor Royals can only be backups to William and Kate? If the family and the courtiers cannot see that a family like the Sussexes are a positive thing in the eyes of the public, then it has a big problem," said Williams.
From a PR perspective, this interview is crushing for "The Firm," as the royal family is often called. While we have not heard the other side of the story, the fact that two high-profile royals have been willing to go on the record to say that they felt so inadequately supported that one of them considered killing themselves is horrific.
Royalist supporters are already dismissing the couple's claims as a performance. While this might go down well with a very specific group of people in Britain, there is no escaping what a damning moment this is for an institution whose future is far from certain once its current head is no longer here.
ASIA MARKETS
Malaysian glove makers are ‘too cheap to ignore’ after recent fall in share price, analyst says
Shares of Top Glove, the world’s largest rubber gloves producer, have fallen 17.7% this year as of Monday’s close. Its smaller peers Hartalega, Supermax and Kossan have dropped between 18% and 30%.
Such declines are “unjustified,” said Ng Chi Hoong, an analyst at Malaysian investment bank Affin Hwang.
Ng reiterated his “overweight” call on the sector and has a “buy” rating on the four stocks.
SINGAPORE — The recent plunge in share prices of Malaysian rubber gloves makers is “unjustified,” said an analyst who’s predicting further upside for the stocks.

Shares of Top Glove, the world’s largest rubber gloves producer, have fallen 17.7% this year as of Monday’s close. Its smaller peers Hartalega, Supermax and Kossan have dropped between 18% and 30%.

In comparison, the benchmark FTSE Bursa Malaysia KLCI Index fell 0.9% in the same period.
CLOSING THE GAPGender remains a major career barrier for women in Asia, but solutions exist
As another International Women’s Day rolls around, businesses have been making bold pledges to empower their female employees and strive toward equality. But still, in 2021, large swathes of women say their gender remains a major barrier to their professional progression.

A full one-third of women in Asia-Pacific say they believe their gender has been a significant barrier to opportunity because of the lack of guidance, skills and time they receive as women, according to LinkedIn’s Opportunity Index 2021.

As a result, two in five (41%) women professionals in the region believe they get fewer career development opportunities than men.

The report, which surveyed 10,000 working professionals across Australia, China, India, Japan, Malaysia, the Philippines and Singapore, highlights the continued hurdles women face in their career development and its implications for society
Indeed, while seven in 10 of those surveyed said they believe gender equality is important for a fair society, four in 10 said they think it is impossible to achieve because of fundamental differences between men and women.

Businesses and governments have been battling that narrative. After all, the economics speak for themselves: Increased female employment rates could increase OECD countries’ gross domestic product by $6 trillion.

Yet, gender equality is still not a top 10 priority for 70% of organizations, according to IBM’s new “Women, leadership and missed opportunities” report. In fact, it found that the number of women in senior leadership positions has barely changed in the past two years, and there are today fewer women in the pipeline to fill executive roles than in 2019.

The pandemic has only exacerbated those shortcomings.

With women said to be more adversely affected by the pandemic, PwC’s 2021 Women in Work Index found that progress for women could be back at 2017 levels by the end of the year. That’s due in large part to the disproportionate burden of childcare that falls on women, with mothers now spending an average of 31 hours per week on caregiving duties — almost equivalent to another full-time job.

Still, there are important steps businesses and individuals can take to ease that burden.

What women can do to beat career hurdles
LinkedIn’s vice president of talent and learning solutions, Feon Ang, advised women to be clear about their ambitions and the professional goals they wish to achieve.

“It’s really important to understand your personal strengths and your passion,” she told CNBC Make It.

For Ang, that was “connecting the dots around what’s happening externally and how it affects your career.” In 1997, noticing that “everyone was talking about YK2″ (the year 2000), she embarked on a career in tech. In 2013, seeing the hype around social media, she joined LinkedIn.
After identifying those goals, women should be open about them and make it clear to business leaders where they want to go, she said. An advocate or sponsor can help with that, acting as a representative or backer among other senior figures.

“More than just mentoring you, find people that sponsor you, someone that will advocate for you to move forward,” said Ang.

“Of course, you have to do a good job because no leader will advocate for you if not. You also have to show your ability to grow and be open-minded. That constant reskilling is important for everyone, be it men or women,” she added.

What bosses can do to close the gender gap
In a blog post, Ang also outlined tangible steps bosses and organizations can take to bring about greater equality in the workplace.

Lead conversations around diversity and inclusion — According to LinkedIn’s data, less than one-quarter (23%) of working professionals in Asia-Pacific strongly agree that gender diversity is a priority for their organization. Organizations and managers can shift that narrative by running diversity, equity and inclusion workshops, and making use of free online training courses.
Boost the number of women in leadership roles — On average in organizations in Asia-Pacific, women comprise only 39% of the workforce. Among women leaders, that number is even lower, at 30% and below. Companies can narrow that disparity by introducing female management quotas and leadership pipelines for promising young talent.
Establish family-friendly policies and flexibility schemes — Almost half (45%) of women in Asia-Pacific said that managing familial responsibilities often comes in the way of their career development. Organizations can ease that burden by implementing supportive policies to give parents and caregivers extra time and flexibility when needed.
Launch mentoring programs and community groups — Lack of career guidance and support ranked as one of the top three hurdles for professional women in Asia-Pacific, according to LinkedIn’s study. Professional networking groups and mentoring programs can help address that gap, allowing for problem sharing and solving within supportive circles.
Help women gain new skills and seek out opportunities — To get ahead, women need access to relevant knowledge and experience, yet lack of skills ranked as one of the major barriers holding women back. Companies can help close that gap by investing in regular learning and development programs to help women stay up-to-date as they move forward in their careers.
“There is strength in numbers,” Ang said. “When more organizations come together, we can do more to help bring equitable recovery for all. It always starts with one small step — from encouraging open conversations on diversity and equality, and advocating for practical initiatives from flexible working hours to mentoring programs.”
